So Jaz just said to me, like, one minute you were lying down and then the next minute you're like pacing around the room. So what's happening for me is like I can feel my stamina waning. Yeah. Like it's taking this is taking a toll on my nervous system. I'm sure it's taking a toll on yours too. And so what I needed to do was lie down and breathe and tap and just notice what was in my system, which was really a lot of energy at my solar plexus. I don't in this moment, I'm not going to unpack that further. But then I could feel like actually, yes, I'm tired and I need some kind of rest and soothing. So so that was my micro moment of rest and soothing. Like a cat nap, a two minute tapping cat nap lying on the floor, you know, like just breathe, soothe, soothing music on. And then it was like I could feel that I needed to shift my energy. Right. And so went outside, fresh air. We're going to put some music. Sometimes you have to take time for what it doesn't feel like you have time for. Yes. When we're stressed and we're under pressure and we got to go, we got shit to do. We don't stop because there isn't time to stop. But here's the thing. If you don't stop and take the time, you won't make it to the finish line. How much do we need that? I know that if we're in the middle of a class that you're in the corner like. I'm going to be angry. Okay, okay. Right. Yes. Happy days. I know. I think I'm so right. Because I've probably got the cue pumps now. I feel like I'm going to be angry. So I'm going to read this. I'm just going to read through it. Studies have shown that it is the relationship that heals regardless of modality or technique. That's confronting. So what has been shown. I'm just popping this window. It's not okay. Just I think you just need a little. Yeah. So studies have sort of adequately shown that, you know, regardless of the modality. So another way to phrase this is the number one decider of positive therapeutic outcomes. This is one of the most important things you're learning, okay, amongst all the fancy tricks. The number one decider of positive therapeutic outcomes is therapeutic relationship. Doesn't matter how many good tricks you've got. If the relational space isn't working, it likely will not be a successful process for the client. And even without, if you flip it, what you need to understand is without all the fancy tricks that you're going to learn, it is the relationship that you offer and foster with that human being that will change their life the most. And you need to know that because they've been in talk therapy spaces that will have failed them. And so they will believe that that aspect of what you're offering is the most significant thing, that it's the other ingredients, right? The tricks, the tools you're teaching them, the processing that they really want to do because that's the solution and will fix everything. They are going to believe that those are the important things because, you know, the talking stuff doesn't really do much. You need to know that it does. One, because of the insight that you will be able to bring, one through yourself and two through them. But primarily, it is just the relating, the relationship that heals. Why do you think that is related to what we're learning? Safety? Go on. Safety, okay. They didn't feel loved. They didn't feel loved. Yeah. Caroline, did you have your hand up or was that? I said they didn't have an information. They didn't have an information. Right? Good. Exactly. So the majority of the time, the core wounding is relational. Yeah? Regardless of the symptoms. The core wounding is usually developmental. It's usually relational. So, I mean, it sounds almost too good to be true, doesn't it? But, you know, it's that simple and yet it's that. It actually requires enormous amounts of skill. We are offering them, exactly as you said, what they've never had or rarely had. And that doesn't mean that we're sort of patronizingly parenting our clients, you know? And we'll look at kind of, some of you will know what transparency means, like transparency stuff where, you know, a client will sort of, in a way that isn't always useful but is workable, may parentify you in a way that is not useful. No, it's never not useful, actually, because it's always workable. But so it's easy to confuse this idea. It's like we're not talking about acting out, yeah? Like they want you to rescue them and be their carer because we carry a lot of that traumatized people will often have a lot of rescue archetypes, whether conscious or unconscious, that someone will come and save them. And all the stuff that they haven't had, they will often also project onto you in a way that idealizes you, yeah? And kind of prevent them from having the authentic relational experience that they need. All of that's fine, you know? We'll look more at how to identify that and work with it later. But I just want to be clear that that's obviously not what I'm talking about doing, yeah? We're just talking about offering this stability. Why am I pointing at my body? So we're actually, we're talking about co-regulation. The co-regulation the parent was not able to offer, no matter how much they loved them, yes? So our nervous system is, you know, we have, how does Deb Dana put it? Hopefully we have a bit more regulatory capacity than they do. That's all we're really aiming for, yes? So please don't apply pressure on yourself that you're now supposed to be some sort of... It's not about that. It's just that you have regulatory capacity at this stage that they currently have not had access to, yes? So we're offering that. And so therefore in the therapeutic space or healing container, we're providing the opportunity for a secure attachment experience, a safe attachment experience. That is an enormous responsibility, yeah? In a deeply, so I just want to say that what I put here, this quote, actually came from a client of mine. And I didn't include it to self-indulge. I included it because I think that these types of reflections have helped me over the years name this clearly, yeah? So I call this the art of loving people back to life. And that was because what one of my clients called it. She wrote a beautiful testimonial for me after we'd worked together. And I can't remember her exact words, but she said something like, regardless of my therapeutic skill, I knew the art of loving people back to life, something that she felt most people had forgotten how to do. And it was one of the most beautiful things, you know? And I picked up on it, right? So I'll use some of my mentors as a reflection. In one of Miles' books, who's a highly trained clinical psychotherapist, he talks about early on in his journey working with a really challenging, highly traumatized client and realizing very quickly coming out of his kind of education that he needed to get human to be able to help this dude. My memory was of a really big, aggressive dude. He was involved in a lot of criminal activity and like white boy straight out of Cornell. And, you know, it's like, how do I work with this guy? And he had to almost immediately put a lot of the boundaries that he'd been taught to call aside and under supervision, you know, so under sort of guidance and someone else's experience, really like, just like level up with this guy and like be human. And I think we heard that in one of the early chapters of Bessel's book, that one of his psychiatric professors at Harvard, I believe, right, talks about like ultimately everything's just a human wound. And in one of Rob's books or Priests' books, one of the things that he says in some of his early passages, pages of, I can't remember which book of his it is, that he says that, because he is also a trained psychotherapist, he's British, and he says something like in the early days he really struggled with his love for his clients because he felt it sort of clinically wasn't appropriate. But he realized with time and as he gained trust, right, in his own instinct, that the love he could offer was something that most of his clients desperately needed. And he talks also interestingly, I find it very powerful hearing from a male voice of how many of the women, you know, were deeply wounded by their fathers, abused, you know, even. And how rarely they'd experienced kind of love from a male, from a man, care. And that he realized one of the most powerful things that he could do was allow himself to love them. So that means we have to be really mindful about what we mean by that. And again, that is something we'll come back to in Ethics and Boundaries. Our idea of what loving someone means is often very skewed by our own trauma. It doesn't mean being unboundaried because that could be really confusing for a client. It doesn't mean that we sort of smother or over-attend or, you know, to love them means that we don't always need to please them. You know, to love them means that it just means many things that we'll explore later. But it's on the basis that we need to understand it today. So
 say something really, you know, this is controversial and you've got to start out from a place. So when someone first comes to you, you've got to like them. But like them. You've got to like them. And that, I really shouldn't say that. That would not be what you would be taught in an institution. Make sure you like your client. No. If there are things about your client that are disagreeable, you'd be told to sort of look at them and try and put them aside, that it's your own transference, they're activating something in you, that they remind you of someone. And yeah, that's all true. But like, I'm pretty skilled at self-regulating and I'm also a very compassionate person, right? What I've learned is that I'm not able as a human being, I'm not sure I believe that anyone is. It doesn't matter how compassionate I am. It doesn't matter how good I am at regulating myself. If I just don't gel with you, no matter how much compassion I feel for where you're coming from, why you are the way you are, whatever, if I don't gel with you, like just on a chemical level, you know, on some faint level, and I'm trying to put aside that, I am going to traumatize you. Yeah, I'm going to give you mixed messaging from the get-go. So I have to work with someone, I have to like them. And if I don't, I refer them on. And that may sound like, well, you know, they need your help. And it's like, yes, and they need to find help from someone that they gel with. And they might not know it. Sometimes people will really push. I don't tell people, I don't say. Yeah, I just really don't feel that we gel. Like that would be so wounding. I don't do that. But how to handle that, we can come back to later. But it's the most important thing to me because sometimes people will push me on it, and sometimes it's really hard because it's like, wow, you know, like. And it's often the tiniest, very subtle sense I've learned to pick up on. It's like, I do, I can see the stuff. I can see it. I get it. Do you know what I mean? And I probably could help them. I probably could. And I don't always have great places to refer people to. And they'll come back and they'll push me like, I know you're sad, but is there any way you consider, you know, I do feel really drawn to working with you. And, you know, blah, blah said you were great. And there have been a very less than a handful of occasions that I've in error. And you will make errors, okay? You're going to make errors. You're not never going to get it wrong, all right? I've given on it, and I deeply regretted it, you know? And I've had to refer them on later. I've had to catch it as quickly as I could and return to what I knew to begin with. And it's like there's some sort of inner struggle with me the whole time. I'm not able to hold them in authentic, loving presence because, to be honest, they – I don't know. There's something about it, you know? And I'm very good at unpacking what's mine. But it doesn't get rid of it. So I think that we have to begin from a place of feeling a genuine affinity with someone. And then the whole thing grows from there. You're able to actively love and care for them, you know? And if we can't do that, we have to be humble and wise enough to know that we're not the right person, you know? And there will be someone else who is a good fit, yeah? That does gel with them, that does like them. We're all so different, yeah? We're so different as human beings. It's like I sometimes meet people and I can see it's not even – there's not even a sort of cruelty or nastiness in it. It's like they're really nice. They're really nice, right? It's like they're truly a really lovely person. But there's something in me that we just don't quite – And you've got to have, like, patients for them as well. You're going to – yeah. If you're going to have a long relationship with them. This is going to be a long relationship. Yeah, exactly. So it's so controversial that, you know, the first thing is starting to show that it is the relationship that you're regardless. So if you don't have that and you can't forge that. You can't fake it. No, you can't. Nor should you. That would be the worst. Yes. They would sense that inauthenticity. Yeah, deeply. And it will traumatize them deeply because there is nothing worse that we could do than pretend. But it's like the mixed messages. The mixed messages. Everything's fine. Everything's fine. No, it's not. No, it's not. I can feel that it's not fine even though you're smiling. Most of the mixed messaging is that they received a message that they were loved. But all of the non-verbal energy and behavior didn't feel loving. Yeah? Incongruence. We're offering congruence and you can't offer congruence if you don't gel. I'm so surprised it's controversial. Can you imagine that being in a standardized training? Can you imagine that being there, like at university? You must like your client. And if you don't, it's a bad thing. But it's honestly, you know, so many times I'm let down by an NHS referral because that therapist has to see you. Exactly. Yeah, yeah, they don't get a choice. You don't always get a choice, so let's also respect that for people who work in the system, how hard that is to try to offer a space to someone that actually just maybe triggers you, maybe does remind you of your abusive father because there's no failing in that, right? There's no failing and that would be an F4 fail. I mean, I'd imagine someone in the system in an extreme situation would have the professional discretion to be like, this is not the client for me, right? But we're talking, I'm talking quite a subtle level here. And that would not be something that you would traditionally be asked to take into account or invited to take into account. So how would you bring that up with someone if you were there in a session and had already started sessions and you felt like there wasn't the gels? Well, I'd either hopefully get it at consort. That's why I consult with people. So your first appointment. And what would you say then if you felt like you couldn't work with them? Something along the lines of like, it was really great to meet with you and thank you so much for reaching out for support. I know that takes a lot of courage and for sharing with me so openly. Experience tells me that I'm not sure that I'm exactly the right fit for you. So if you'd like me to, I'm really happy to make some referral suggestions. Yeah, okay. Well, what would you say then if they asked why? I would say it's a subtle thing. It's not easy for me to explain. It's just based on a professional experience. I just don't think that I'm the right person to support this process. You could even say don't have the right skill set because your skill set is compromised. Like when you said to me, like when you said to me in one of our sessions, when you have to have, which is one of the most powerful things you've ever said to me, when you have to have a difficult conversation with someone and it's right for you, it's usually right for them too. Whether or not they know it. Whether or not they know it. Yeah, your boundaries will always be right for the other person, whether or not they realise it at the time. So true. Yeah? I like that session. Yeah, that's so good. Honestly. It's not mine. I had a mentor who used to say to me all the time, the facts are always friendly and like what's good for you is always good for the other person by design, without question. Without question. And that isn't the same as us being like functioning from trauma. This is what I need and like, you know, no, it's when we're coming from a deeply rooted place and we're really connected with our felt experience. It's like this is my need, yeah? This is what feels authentically okay for me, even if the other person doesn't understand that. Even if it wounds them temporarily, it will wound them far less than if you were to move forward whilst ignoring that internal boundary. Exactly. Yeah? Are you with me? Yes. So good. However, to know how to do this skilfully, we cannot be driven by our own dysregulated attachment style, otherwise we risk creating further relational damage, however well-intended we are. Most people's parents are super well-intended. Not all, but most. It doesn't mean that the damage isn't caused. Our intention does not create the outcome, actually. Okay? So here's where we go next before we go any further. So the question at the bottom there is in what ways will your own attachment style, insecurities, dysregulation and unresolved issues potentially bleed into the healing space? And then note that I've put an asterisk and said perfection is one of them. Yeah? So this doesn't mean that your attachment style, insecurities, dysregulation or unresolved issues have to be completely erased, right? No trace of them shall remain for you to safely work with. No, not at all. I mean, good Lord. Who's free of all of those things? I haven't met anyone. It says, you know, how could they? How will they? Let's go with will they. Yeah? Because they will. So let's just get that straight here and now. They will bleed into the healing space. What matters is that you can catch it
 You then have to take it away and deal with it in supervision or with your own mentor. You've got to hold that. Does that make sense? Counseling. I recently had to counsel someone a couple of times. There was no avoiding it. I was really ill and then my kid was really ill and I had no childcare. But it was at a time when she was going through some really difficult stuff. And I knew it created a huge rupture. She rationally understood that it was unavoidable, but emotionally she felt deeply let down and abandoned by me. And I had to bring that to the table because she wasn't going to. And if I hadn't have done that and I'd let her just deny it, I don't think our therapeutic relationship would have been the same again. And so that rupture becomes an opportunity for healing. It allows us to tend to those wounds that have never been addressed because it was never safe to bring them into the room with the person that did them originally. Makes sense? Okay. So come on. I'm going to stop talking at you now. I can't remember how many people we are. Okay. So like... No, wait. Okay. So like one. Look at me, everyone. One, two, three. One, two, three. One, two, three. One, two, three, four. You're now little groups. Bunch together. Talk to each other. This is like a five-minute brainstorm. You've got to get honest. What's your stuff, guys? How's it going to bleed into the space? So here's the question. What's your stuff? What's your stuff? How's it going to bleed into the space? Hang on, wait. So before you start talking, I'll just say this is wounded healer, right? So the wounded healer story, the wounded healer archetype. So I'll just give you Jung's quotes. So the wounded healer archetype has two sides to it. So to quote Jung, because we can do this super fast. Jung said, only the wounded physician heals. Only the wounded physician heals. And then only to the extent that he has healed himself. So this is what Carolyn said earlier. How can we support someone else on their own healing journey? How can we walk them down a path we've never walked, right? And it goes on further to say the analyst must go on learning endlessly. Endlessly, yeah? It is his own hurt that gives the measure of his power to heal. This and nothing else is the meaning of the Greek myth of the wounded physician. However, so our wounding becomes our medicine. However, the wounded healer in a modern context also takes on another quality. Is that most healers are wounded but are not working with that archetype psychotherapeutically in this way. They're wounded in a way that they are using the power of their position to try to medicate their own pain. Yes? Yeah. Uh-huh. Yeah. I am the one who heals. That will be part of your makeup. I promise you. Your trauma and your gift are intimately interwoven with one another. One of my own therapists used to say that what the trauma does is it takes your gifts. It steals them, it twists them, it distorts them, and it abuses them. What does that mean? Like, I'm a healer. I'm a teacher, right? Sadly, my family unit abused those gifts. They sensed, right? Because they were thirsty for nurturing. They'd never received it, right? So the adults, the caregivers in my life, used my innate human gifts to try to quench their own thirst. And they made me into their healer. I was my mother's companion, counsellor, confidant, right? All of those things. So my trauma caused me to become someone that I would excessively caretake people in my life. I would try to fix people because their pain made me panic. Like, my mother's main pain had made me feel panicked, which of course it did. It was terrifying to have such unstable parents. There was no one to hold me, right? So I have my gifts, and you have yours, but you have to reclaim them for them to be useful. And you have to start to untangle them from how the trauma has distorted them. With me? So work out how have your gifts got distorted by your trauma, and what do you need to untangle to make sure that the space doesn't get messy, okay? Talk. I just want to introduce something here, which is... So there are two things that need to happen in spaces like this for us. And I don't know which one it is for you, okay? And it will change based on the moment. But sometimes it's really important for us to use our voice and come in, right? And sometimes we also need to recognize that we don't always need to speak and share our insight or what we've realized. We will often have a lot of compulsive need. I would have a lot of that, yeah? The compulsive need for my insight to be... You know, a lot of my wisdom wasn't recognized.
 I was generally entirely invisible to those that I needed to see, me and him, right? So there's nothing wrong with that. I needed to do it, but that meant that I have been the person for many years that kind of overshares and always had to be the one who talks and all this stuff. So given that we are tight on time and given that we are training not purely on retreat, I would invite you an internal curiosity, yeah? That's like, you know, am I someone who doesn't use my voice enough and actually would it be no pressure, I need to pressurize myself to come in? Would it be valuable for me to speak my insight? Am I someone who speaks more often, right? And maybe I could step back and create space for others who don't feel they have as much space, yes? That also relates to things like privilege. Some of us feel naturally and have been raised with more of a sense that we have a right to speak than others, okay? So let's just be mindful of that, particularly when we have less time. I'm not saying that if you're someone who tends to speak more that you can't speak. I'm just saying let's be mindful when we have little time, yeah? And realize that sometimes our own knowing is enough, yeah? And we don't always have, you know, I've had a lot of stuff over the years about it's like, particularly with teachers and mentors, because I want recognition. It's like, oh, I want to make sure that, you know, he or she knows that I have this marvelous insight, you know? So yeah, yeah, there's a lot of that that has gone on for me over the years. So there's been a lot of healing paradoxically and learning that I don't always need to speak it or share it with space. So let's be, you know, let's invite that. So, you know, what did you find, you know? What did you find? What's your stuff? How's it going to intrude on space? Anyone? No one? Georgie. So following on from what you just said about using voices, I have an issue with using my voice and we can just speak about that. So for me, public speaking is like hard work. And it's because we've just, we've just told you. It's to do with body language and having eye contact. So I'm great in a small group. With a large group, I can't tell. I can't look at you all. So I'm like, are you judging me over there? Because I can't see your face. And so it goes back to judgment. And I came to you the other day, didn't I? And I said, oh, I overshared. It was too much. It was too much. And then I was like, I think, so I kept saying, I'm not enough. And then it was like, but maybe it's because you feel like you're too much. And so how would that kind of lead into a healing space? So I was like, I don't really know how that would work. But actually, then thinking about it, it would probably be meeting somebody and straight away making that judgment of them being judgmental of myself. Does that make sense? Yeah, sure. So are you judging me? And then it's like, how can I sit with that? And how would that affect your ability to support them, do you think? I think it would be quite tricky, wouldn't it? I don't think you would allow them to have their space because then you're then too much in your head. Preoccupied. Right? Can't offer presence if I'm preoccupied with my own internal experience. Being attuned to our internal experience is very different than being preoccupied. And you recognize that vigilance that's there because relationships weren't safe. So there's a vigilance of reading cues. Yeah? Is this okay? Yeah? Am I safe? Absolutely. That's going to be right at the heart of the issue for most of us. So it's tricky, hey? Because we're going to have to learn how to read people in a functional, healthy, therapeutically useful way and not be overcome by the trauma-driven vigilance, which can actually obscure being. They're different things. It sounds like the same thing, but it isn't. Actually reading you is different from being triggered by you. Right? Because when I'm reading you, I'm coming from a place of regulation and curiosity as to what is happening for you so I can be with it. But when I'm vigilant, I am likely misreading your cues all of the time. A guy called Richard Grannon, great trauma-informed life coach, he often says, for someone with complex trauma, they can be triggered by someone raising their eyebrow. So yes, absolutely, and thank you for bringing it in. So it's to do with our own self-achievement and ability to regulate and to some degree our own processing over time, right? So that we can increasingly, and it takes years, be able to relax down into ourselves in a way that that level of sensitivity, that level of vigilance, relational vigilance, is not dominating in the same way. That doesn't mean that there won't be flashes or echoes of life. You know? I am not free from the need for people to like me. It's so deep. Like Miles puts it, he's like, do you love me? We're checking all the time. That's what's there underneath it all. When we feel something weird with someone, and we go like, you're okay? What we really mean is, do you love me? So you're lovely. Yeah? That's what's happening all the time. I love you. Right? So hopefully the right changes over time is that I'm not free from that, but I'm not dominated by it. I can handle you not liking me because I know how to tend to myself. Yes? The imprint may be there, but it's no longer the driver. Because there are other things, not because I fight it, because there is another relationship present to myself as well as the one that my parents imposed on me. So yeah, thank you very much, Georgie. Anyone else? Yeah, I just realised when you were saying that, there's a few of them. This one is to do with, it takes me a while to relax in front of new people. And that initial contact, even when teaching private yoga, so much self-regulation is necessary for me to be settled and actually read something. And so that initial, yet the first meeting is so important. And so, yeah, I'm wondering how could I work with that to be able to ease my own system? Yeah, you've got to go in. So paradox of this is that, what if you were to completely and deeply accept that every first meeting you have with someone will feel that way to some degree? And that that's relationally normal. Yeah, and you know what, I was actually wanting to ask everyone, what's your experience of first meeting someone? Does anyone find first contact with someone, do they feel absolutely at ease or as at ease as they will seven times or 17 or 17 times? So I appreciate that we're talking about a spectrum and that with trauma we will recognise that there will often be a lot of social anxiety because relationships are terrifying. They are, the people are the trigger. That's why I often say it's like complex PTSD, sometimes attachment trauma is not seen as trauma proper. Attachment trauma is trauma proper because if, and this with sensitivity and respect and I deeply apologise if this offends anyone either here or who comes to watch it later, but I just, I do it to contextualise something, right, to offer a landscape for CPTSD and developmental trauma. If you go to war, and I use that example because it's seen as like the biggie, a biggie, right? It's a horrific, traumatising experience, no one would deny it, right? You would not deny that like having a bomb go off next to you could be highly traumatic. Threat to life is how they generally define trauma. So you go to war, a bomb goes off right next to you, you nearly die, that's traumatic. You get to leave, not ever return to that place and then hopefully, God willing, you know, get off the support to process it and it's kind of done. With relational wounding and developmental trauma, you grow up behind enemy lines and your home is your war zone and you've never known what it's like to feel safe and it's devastating. There's nowhere, there's no home to go back to. Yes? And there is threat to life because to an infant, loss of connection is threat to life. With me? So yes, we're going to feel it and we want to use the regulation that you're talking about so it isn't so dominant that it's making us a bit weird in the optic, you know? But at the same time, I think it can be helpful to remind ourselves that hopefully we've just got a bit more regulatory capacity and self-achievement than they do because that's all that's required, right? If they're there and I'm here, regulation is going to happen. Yes? As long as I'm a little bit below them on my nervous system spectrum, then, you know, I can regulate them, I can co-regulate. And to some degree, it's normal because I think what we resist persists. The more we judge it, the more we see it as wrong, actually, the more anxious we become about the fact that we're anxious, you know? The more we feel like we shouldn't be stressed on that first appointment, the more stressed we will get because there's this energetic conflict. And there is a perfection to getting it perfect. Absolutely. And knowing it's normal, natural for everyone, for that first experience. You know, I just said I asked for that realisation around it. Yes, exactly. And it definitely improves with time, eh? Like, the more you do it. And I'm not talking ten times, I'm talking hundreds of times over the years, yeah? Naturally, because neural networks are formed.
 the body and how the sensory calibrate. It takes time for people to learn to treat themselves with respect and tenderness when nobody ever has, you know. These are decades of imprints etched in. One of my old mentors used to say, like, you know, if it's taken you 20 years to walk down a cul-de-sac, you can't walk back out in a day. Yeah? So maybe we slept walked in and we can learn how to jog out. But the more frenzied we are, yeah, maybe a cul-de-sac wasn't a great example because there's only one way back out. But the more frenzied we are, the less we know which direction we're running in and it all just gets very, very messy. So we need to cultivate some patience with the process. Exactly. Yeah, very valid point. So the self-doubt can come in. Your own low self-esteem is going to intrude and confuse you and create doubt and cause you to feel like this is when you'll start throwing mud at the wall. Yeah? Okay, well, you know, maybe we could do this, maybe we could do that. Now this doesn't mean that I never respond to a client's request to go in a different direction or pick up pace like I do. But it's very considered, you know. It's like, someone's like, I really, you know, I'm just feeling a bit frustrated. Like, I want to get on to this work. Sometimes that will come at the right moment. What they're feeling, the frustration sometimes they're feeling, isn't because they're pushing too hard. Sometimes it's because they're ready. You know, like if you see a kid going through developmental stages, they'll get frustrated that they can't quite do something that they can nearly do. Yeah? And it's because they're almost ready, but they're not quite there. So sometimes it's like, yeah, I hear you. I think we're kind of there. You know, we can go gently in that direction. We can begin looking at digging a bit deeper and maybe considering looking at doing a few processing sessions and, you know, see how it lands. Yeah? I'm not going to patronize someone to like, you know, no, it is on my time schedule alone. You know, I shall be your master and commander. Again, re-traumatizing. I'm taking the power away. So the subtleties of it are important. Yeah? And this is why, you know, the oversight, the supervision, having someone with more experience that we can refer back to is really important. Not just in the early days, but continuously. Like, check ourselves. Yeah? It's like, well, this is what's coming up. This is where I feel, you know, that I feel like it probably actually is safe to begin exploring this territory. It's a bit earlier than I, what do you think? And to check ourselves. Check yourself. Don't feel like every decision you're supposed to know the answer, like you're some kind of oracle. So yes, like doubt, impatience, driven by our own feelings of inadequacy, right? Our own low self-esteem. So learning to trust in our own instinct, in our own ability, a little bit like there is that reparenting aspect of like, you know, kids sometimes want to do shit that's not safe for them. You know? And it's the parent's job to provide the boundary, the loving boundary. It's like, I get that it's frustrating. I really understand how much you want to do this thing that you feel ready for. And I promise that we'll get there, you know? But at the moment, my professional experience says that if we start doing this right now, with this going on in your life or, you know, before we spend a bit more time over here, I'm concerned that it may actually have the opposite impact. And you've worked so hard, you know? You've really like worked hard to get your system regulated. We don't want to overstretch it, right? Just that moment before it's ready to go deeper. Does that make sense? Like, in reflecting that, how do you feel? Like, what do you think? And making it conversational, yeah? Not feeling that we're imposing something on someone and shutting them down. But it's like a parent that just says no all the time and doesn't explain it. Don't do that. Don't do that. Don't do that. It's like, no, darling, you know, please don't play with the electrical cables because mummy's worried that if you do that, you may hurt yourself. You know it can be really dangerous. It's such a different experience. It's not just no, it's a no because. And I know that that might be hard to hear. How do you feel about it? And think of that lost child, yeah? Like, even at risk of losing a client, I refuse to re-traumatize you, yeah? So, okay. One more? I'm sort of a bit, like, concerned that I'll be too empathetic slash enmeshed. If something triggers me, I display inappropriate emotion. Like, when people talk, I just cry. And I'm worried. And then I'm worried that I'll be worried about that and, you know, lose the moment for them, not hold the space appropriately. Good one. Yes, see, this is a great one to bring in. And I think this is, you know, there are more, I'm sure we'll get more opportunities, but I really like this, so thank you. So my answer, when, you know, different therapists would take different positions on this, okay? From a clinical perspective, you would not show emotion, right? Like, that's just a no-no. From a more humanistic perspective and definitely based on the way I work, and I would argue from a more trauma-informed perspective, to a degree. So this isn't a flat answer, yeah? Your emotion is not always inappropriate. If you, okay, you know, sometimes clients have shared things with me that, well, they're just in a certain place, right? It's really, I just feel deeply with them. And when I've allowed my emotion to come forward, they've never had someone else validate that what they went through was painful. My tears affirm the horror of what they experienced. They've never seen someone display authentic empathy or compassion, and they will, sometimes it gives them further permission. It's like you'll cry together. And that doesn't mean that you're sobbing and they're sobbing. Yeah, so let's come back to that. We'll return to that problem, yeah, okay? But so, you know, it's okay to be a human being. Okay, so on your, wait, on your one that I've got rid of, which was like the therapeutic container, I think it says on there, oh no. Yeah, so you can't really see it on the picture, but a quote from Miles is like, presence, acceptance, humanity. Yeah? You know, we're choosing not to be clinicians. So we're working, like I say, heart to heart, humans to humans. We're learning to work heart to heart. And I think that we don't have community. There's no tribe. There's no community to hold us. We're in isolation. I need, you know, I think that we need someone to grieve with and to feel angry with us and for us. And yes, like to not be alone in it, right? However, the other bit that you're getting at is where, so with, which we're not going to do, so we're just not going to have time, we'll come back to it, but not because this is officially person-centered or humanist of counseling. It isn't, but we're drawing on aspects, yeah? There's that sheet of, you know, principles of person-centered counseling. The core principles are empathy, congruence, and unconditional positive regard, okay? So we're going to come back to those at some stage. But we're kind of covering them anyway. But empathy and compassion are an interesting thing that are important to talk about because although I understand what is meant there, right? And that is empathy, yes? When there is sadness there and my tears come forth, also there is empathy happening. But often people, so, empathy in a way, so you hear a lot on social media about being an empath, right? And or being flooded by other people's energies and stuff like that. And the thing about what is rarely spoken about is that that type of empathic experience is a trauma response. It's because in your environment, nobody spoke what was happening and there was, and the environment felt unsafe, emotionally unstable. So you had to develop a high level of achievement to be able to read what was going on without anyone explaining it to you. You had to be able to pre-empt, yeah? What would happen. That mum was going to get upset or dad was going to get cross or that mum and dad were having an argument but nobody was saying it, yes? So we're really talking about flooding, yes? And also, there's this really interesting thing which is like, you can't actually, I mean, this is tricky. So if we were talking on a spiritual, energetic level, we would say that, you know, you can feel someone else's pain because actually we co-regulate and our systems interact with one another. But I think therapeutically and from a trauma-informed perspective, it's kind of interesting to consider the idea that, you know, officially speaking, you can't feel someone else's pain. Whatever is coming through your system belongs to you, right? It may be activated by their pain, yeah? You are relating. But what's coming up in you is yours and what's rising in them is theirs. Compassion, compassion is a different thing, right? Compassion is more neutral, right? You can feel deep, deep compassion for somebody's pain and feel very unactivated by it. And that, I think we mentioned that on another day, right? Real, authentic, powerful compassion from a place of trauma
