Say that at the end of the day. We're going to have some fun today, okay? We've got to dive back in. But if it goes to plan, which it won't, then we're going to have quite a practice today. Kind of learn, practice, learn, practice, learn, practice, okay? Traci's just doing something personal. She'll be with us shortly in a couple of minutes. So, all right. Let's stick our breath in together. Let it go. Just sit for a moment. Let's allow ourselves to land, let our hearts and minds settle. Okay, one long. Okay. I felt the knees. I felt the head. Okay. All right. So what you need, we're not doing the sheets in order, of course. So I need you to grab, there's only two sheets. No, wait. Hang on. Don't look at your sheets. What am I talking about? Do not look at your sheets. There's a much smarter way to do this. For God's sake, don't look at your sheets. Okay, do you hear that? Okay, do you hear what you went, like pitch-wise? Yeah. Make it frustrating. Yeah, everybody automatically went quite vibrationally high. Be frustrated. Okay, now look. Okay, look at everybody's fists. Everybody is doing something with their fingers and their fists. Something. Whether they're here, like Carolyn's got them here. Is there tension in your hands? Yeah. And there's energy in the arms, which is why the arms have become mobile in some way. No matter where they've come to. And a lot of people have started to really contract. Like Katie's even down on the floor, which is like, and you've got fists. How does that feel for you? It's like... Yeah. Okay, that's interesting. We're not really doing sound today, but let's. So make a joyous sound. Do you hear that? Okay, do you hear what you went, like pitch-wise? Make it frustrating. Yeah, everybody automatically went quite vibrationally high. Be frustrated. Okay, now look. Okay, look at everybody's fists. Everybody is doing something with their fingers and their fists. Something. Whether they're here, like Carolyn's got them here. Is there tension in your hands? Yeah. And there's energy in the arms, which is why the arms have become mobile in some way. No matter where they've come to. And a lot of people have started to really contract. Like Katie's even down on the floor, which is like, and you've got fists. How does that feel for you? It's like... Yeah. Okay, that's interesting. We're not really doing sound today, but let's. So make a joyous sound. Do you hear that? Okay, do you hear what you went, like pitch-wise? Make it frustrating. Yeah, everybody automatically went quite vibrationally high. Be frustrated. Okay, now look. Okay, look at everybody's fists. Everybody is doing something with their fingers and their fists. Something. Whether they're here, like Carolyn's got them here. Is there tension in your hands? Yeah. And there's energy in the arms, which is why the arms have become mobile in some way. No matter where they've come to. And a lot of people have started to really contract. Like Katie's even down on the floor, which is like, and you've got fists. How does that feel for you? It's like... Yeah. Okay, that's interesting. We're not really doing sound today, but let's. So make a joyous sound. Do you hear that? Okay, do you hear what you went, like pitch-wise? Make it frustrating. Yeah, everybody automatically went quite vibrationally high. Be frustrated. Okay, now look. Okay, look at everybody's fists. Everybody is doing something with their fingers and their fists. Something. Whether they're here, like Carolyn's got them here. Is there tension in your hands? Yeah. And there's energy in the arms, which is why the arms have become mobile in some way. No matter where they've come to. And a lot of people have started to really contract. Like Katie's even down on the floor, which is like, and you've got fists. How does that feel for you? It's like... Yeah. Okay, that's interesting. We're not really doing sound today, but let's. So make a joyous sound. Do you hear that? Okay, do you hear what you went, like pitch-wise? Make it frustrating. Yeah, everybody automatically went quite vibrationally high. Be frustrated. Okay, now look. Okay, look at everybody's fists. Everybody is doing something with their fingers and their fists. Something. Whether they're here, like Carolyn's got them here. Is there tension in your hands? Yeah. And there's energy in the arms, which is why the arms have become mobile in some way. No matter where they've come to. And a lot of people have started to really contract. Like Katie's even down on the floor, which is like, and you've got fists. How does that feel for you? It's like... Yeah. Okay, that's interesting. We're not really doing sound today, but let's. So make a joyous sound. Do you hear that? Okay, do you hear what you went, like pitch-wise? Make it frustrating. Yeah, everybody automatically went quite vibrationally high. Be frustrated. Okay, now look. Okay, look at everybody's fists. Everybody is doing something with their fingers and their fists. Something. Whether they're here, like Carolyn's got them here. Is there tension in your hands? Yeah. And there's energy in the arms, which is why the arms have become mobile in some way. No matter where they've come to. And a lot of people have started to really contract. Like Katie's even down on the floor, which is like, and you've got fists. How does that feel for you? It's like... Yeah. Okay, that's interesting. We're not really doing sound today, but let's. So make a joyous sound. Do you hear that? Okay, do you hear what you went, like pitch-wise? Make it frustrating. Yeah, everybody automatically went quite vibrationally high. Be frustrated. Okay, now look. Okay, look at everybody's fists. Everybody is doing something with their fingers and their fists. Something. Whether they're here, like Carolyn's got them here. Is there tension in your hands? Yeah. And there's energy in the arms, which is why the arms have become mobile in some way. No matter where they've come to. And a lot of people have started to really contract. Like Katie's even down on the floor, which is like, and you've got fists. How does that feel for you? It's like... Yeah. Okay, that's interesting. We're not really doing sound today, but let's. So make a joyous sound. Do you hear that? Okay, do you hear what you went, like pitch-wise? Make it frustrating. Yeah, everybody automatically went quite vibrationally high. Be frustrated. Okay, now look. Okay, look at everybody's fists. Everybody is doing something with their fingers and their fists. Something. Whether they're here, like Carolyn's got them here. Is there tension in your hands? Yeah. And there's energy in the arms, which is why the arms have become mobile in some way. No matter where they've come to. And a lot of people have started to really contract. Like Katie's even down on the floor, which is like, and you've got fists. How does that feel for you? It's like... Yeah. Okay, that's interesting. We're not really doing sound today, but let's. So make a joyous sound. Do you hear that? Okay, do you hear what you went, like pitch-wise? Make it frustrating. Yeah, everybody automatically went quite vibrationally high. Be frustrated. Okay, now look. Okay, look at everybody's fists. Everybody is doing something with their fingers and their fists. Something. Whether they're here, like Carolyn's got them here. Is there tension in your hands? Yeah. And there's energy in the arms, which is why the arms have become mobile in some way. No matter where they've come to. And a lot of people have started to really contract. Like Katie's even down on the floor, which is like, and you've got fists. How does that feel for you? It's like... Yeah. Okay, that's interesting. We're not really doing sound today, but let's. So make a joyous sound. Do you hear that? Okay, do you hear what you went, like pitch-wise? Make it frustrating. Yeah, everybody automatically went quite vibrationally high. Be frustrated. Okay, now look. Okay, look at everybody's fists. Everybody is doing something with their fingers and their fists. Something. Whether they're here, like Carolyn's got them here. Is there tension in your hands? Yeah. And there's energy in the arms, which is why the arms have become mobile in some way. No matter where they've come to. And a lot of people have started to really contract. Like Katie's even down on the floor, which is like, and you've got fists. How does that feel for you? It's like... Yeah. Okay, that's interesting. We're not really doing sound today, but let's. So make a joyous sound. Do you hear that? Okay, do you hear what you went, like pitch-wise? Make it frustrating. Yeah, everybody automatically went quite vibrationally high. Be frustrated. Okay, now look. Okay, look at everybody's fists. Everybody is doing something with their fingers and their fists. Something. Whether they're here, like Carolyn's got them here. Is there tension in your hands? Yeah. And there's energy in the arms, which is why the arms have become mobile in some way. No matter where they've come to. And a lot of people have started to really contract. Like Katie's even down on the floor, which is
 And we saw some versions of this here, like I remember Park Ogden talking about a client, like all you could see was a flicker of her fingers, yeah? The beginning, but it was trapped there, yeah? The ability to extend was gone. And then you see this whole range, like there was a finger, you know? It was interesting that some people were front on and some people were, yeah? So that, you know, because no can be a flight, right? So it's not that that's necessarily, none of them are better or worse than one another actually. It's just that they tell us something about our somatic vocabulary. Does that phrase make sense to you? What vocabulary do we have access to because of our trauma, because of our previous learning experiences? What are our procedural memories? Does that term make sense? Procedural memories. So when A happens, my body will respond, it's a memory, procedurally with this response. So we think a lot about repatterning our thoughts, but we don't look so much at repatterning our procedural actions, memories. We don't look at somatic vocabulary. And the reason that I love this work is because, you know, I think you probably got the gist that I'm not generally speaking a hacker, I'm a deep diver. I'm not one who will generally sell a shortcut over the deep dive. But if there's one that really works that doesn't bypass, I will use it every time. Like the nervous system work is a hack, yeah? If you can hack someone's nervous system with them, you can create rapid change for them before you ever touch the psychological content. Yeah, over three months, it really depends on the individual circumstances. But if you hit gold with it, three months, six months, a year, someone will be behaving dramatically different and experiencing themselves very differently, very, very quickly compared to years and years of years of kind of therapeutic digging, yeah? I call this somatic hacking, how to bypass the mind and tap the healing power of your body. So if I'm working with someone who has really, really limited boundary vocabulary because their boundaries were so violated throughout their lives, sometimes, you know, one of the things that I'll do with them is like, just get out of the conversation around boundaries because what happens is we can sit, sorry, people get very upset. They get very frustrated with themselves, but they begin to see so clearly where they would like to place their nose, but they become very distressed that they aren't able to place them and sadly the trauma will often turn in in a way that, you know, we shame and blame ourselves for that as though it is a failing, a lack, a weakness. And it isn't, you know. If you've never lifted like a dumbbell, you're not going to be able to pick it up. Your muscles don't know how to do it. All these simple things actually that we do, we're not going to do any Bonnie Bainbridge stuff. So Lady Bonnie Bainbridge, she taught about developmental movements, yeah? Like crawling, reaching, grasping, pulling, all these kinds of things that we learn to do developmentally. They often get disrupted. We don't learn how to grasp and take because we were too loud. But all these little things that we take for granted, like being able to hold a bottle, being able to unscrew. We don't even think about these movements, do we? Why? Because they're procedural memories. They're easy to me. But if you watched like a two-year-old or something, if I gave a two-year-old, maybe not two, I can't think now, like one, like that, they would be like grabbing at the bottle, yeah? Maybe knocking it over because they haven't quite got the grasp right. And then the lid, well, that would be like a whole, I don't know, like three minutes, 10 minutes, 20 minutes of entertainment, like the screwing and the, yeah? So we only have access to what we are allowed to explore and learn. And that includes all our emotional language. So if as a toddler, we weren't, if as a baby we weren't allowed to cry, we were left, yeah? The cry was, you know, the cry for help or the stifled scream, right? If the scream or the cry was ignored or unattended to, or it wasn't met with nurturing, the child will learn to stifle that scream because no one's coming. No one's coming. It's a useless expenditure of energy, yeah? So this will get shut down. Or if it gets shamed, so at a later age, yeah, it would be a different example. It may not be the infant cry. It might be the fall over, graze my knee, cry for help. Oh, don't be silly. Yeah? If I can't use it, I lose it, somatically as well as neurologically. Yes? That principle applies to what's in the body as much as what is in the brain, okay? Obviously the two things interact, but let's just look at it through a different lens, okay? So if I am a toddler and I scream and I stop and I get sent to my room for it or put on a naughty step or I'm shamed, yeah? Or I'm ignored. Or worse. Or worse. Yeah? Because I get hit. I get smacked. I get slapped. That happens a lot. It happens. Then what's going to happen to my no? It's like, no, I don't want this. But if I extend my no, it's going to be stuck up, eh? If I extend my no, then I may be harmed, whether that be emotionally wounded. I will experience directly that abandonment, yeah? So I'm not even going to try and put it out there because I can't bear the response. I'm going to learn not to go there because it's too frightening and it risks rupture. It risks loss of connection. Now, of course, this can also, and I know we're getting into really sticky territory here, okay? So let's, you know, whatever's coming up for you, it's okay. It can be here. Let's breathe. I don't mean breathe, breathe it away. I mean let's breathe into whatever's present in the room and present with each other, yeah? That could also, of course, come up. That can definitely then also express in later life traumas. So there are circumstances where maybe somebody's no was alive to begin with, but then at a later time they are attacked, yeah? They're attacked. They're raped. And in the moment of the attack, their body, very cleverly, yes? Because the body instinctively knows that the perpetrator, I'm using generalized terms to try to make it less triggering, okay? The perpetrator is stronger, is bigger, maybe, let's say, has a weapon, good, yeah? If I fight back, I will be at greater risk of harm. So where's the only place to go? Dorsal. Collapse. Yeah? And if that gets stuck, so will the no, so will the fight. If the trauma gets trapped, that person, until it is processed, which is what we will do later, we're not doing that today, okay? We're just learning, like, the language of the soma. That person may not be able to say no anywhere in their life until we are able to help them reclaim the no that was not safe to use in that moment, yes? That makes sense. So with somatic hacking, we can think about coming through the body instead of the mind. So if I have a client who has lost access to their no, to their boundaries, to their power, because it was stolen, because it was violated, because it was shut down, in any which way, then I may at some, I may really try to almost intervene, actually. Sometimes I work with boundaries very, you know, very, like, cognitive-based fashion with people. We talk about boundaries. We explore stretching, like our boundary muscle, you know? But only from a place of regulation. So once someone's getting regulated, they're going to get a lot more of this going on. And they might be able to start practicing and applying. But even if regulation is present, if the trauma trigger of the no is not safe is so strong, it actually doesn't matter how genuinely regulated that person is becoming. If they then are in a situation that requires that no, the very requirement of the no will activate their trauma in a way that will mean they become dysregulated, yes? Does that make sense? So no matter how regulated they were for the last three weeks, they will now become activated and the no will disappear. They'll lose their cortical function. They won't be able to utilize it, okay? So in that instance, I'll start working with someone, you know, like, show me your no, right? So whatever I get, let's say, okay, how does it feel to, like, come all the way out? Let's just explore that. What does that feel like? Now I will say that the little subtext to this is that if the response that I got was, like, no, I don't like it, and I can see that even that is causing them distress, hands off, won't touch it until I start processing with them later down the line, and you're going to learn how to do that, okay? So you will have that skill to return to. But if the response I get is kind of like, I don't know, oh, it feels weird. It makes me feel a bit, but can you hear the tone in my voice? I can hear that it feels uncomfortable because it's new, but they're less stable. They're okay. They're not highly activated by exploring that territory. Then I might say, well, you know, why don't you explore doing that with your practice every morning? See how it would feel to just take, you see how quick it is as well
 and feel relaxed and centered will begin to change the way that they engage in the world. Are you following this? Does it make any sense? Okay. Yes, please. By all means. I really struggled to say no, and I remember you... I remember us doing that, and I use it so much now, and looking back, it has been absolutely life-changing for me because when I feel like I can't say no, I'm like, sorry, that doesn't work for me, and I actually do it to people. I do it with my husband, and I actually... My kids do it as well, and it has, like... I've just made that connection now, that how much that's actually really helped me. Yeah, great. Thank you for sharing that. So it's everywhere, people's somatic vocabulary, and this is part of what you're learning to read, whether or not you bring it to them in the moment. You're going to notice if every time your client talks about their partner or their boss or their mom or whatever, they move backwards. Yeah? Yeah? It's like... Or they start to move away from themselves. Their head, they start to go away. They start to drift because it's painful. Or... Just... Yeah. They're talking about something. It's like, okay, they're frustrated. And can you feel how the frustration is the locked rage? It comes this high and it gets stuck, right? So they're angry, right? But their anger has not been welcome or has not been able to action in a way that has felt helpful for them, right? Maybe harm has come. So you're watching, and occasionally, light touch, light touch, because as soon as you start to work with someone's body, you need to know this. And this is why, you know, this is why I'm giving you all the skills. Because you could train someone in this stuff. This could be... We could do all the somatic counseling skills and I could not teach you the processing later. But for me, that's unsafe. Because trust... If you... Just the tiniest movement... I'm thinking about someone. Like this. She's talking about something and she's doing this. You know? And I'll start to mirror it, right? So she's doing it. I'm like, yeah. Like, yeah. Yeah? And they won't notice that you are mimicking them. But what you're doing is affirming. Like, what's this? So what I'm giving an example of here is like in a client situation where they do struggle with boundaries. And what I'm hearing is that they're starting to use their voice more and make hard choices. And as she's talking about what she was doing, she's... And I'm like, yeah. Like, you were like... And I'm like, yeah. So I'm mimicking. I'm affirming that behavior. And then I might be like, do you notice what you're doing with your hand? And they often don't. We often don't notice what we're doing until someone draws our attention to it. And the client might be kind of like... Yeah. I'm like, what does that feel like? I don't know. Like, just... Yeah. And it's okay if that becomes a bit caricatured because you're feeling it. Yeah. It's like, yeah, just no more. Like, get it away. Yeah? I'm just... I'm pushing it away. I'm getting it away. I'm clearing it out. And you see what's happening with my arm. It's getting bigger because I've invited them to explore it. And I'm like, how does it feel? Yeah, it feels good. Just like, no. Yeah? And it's okay if that becomes a bit caricatured because you're feeling it. Yeah. It's like, yeah, just no more. Like, get it away. Yeah? I'm just... I'm pushing it away. I'm getting it away. I'm clearing it out. And you see what's happening with my arm. It's getting bigger because I've invited them to explore it. And I'm like, how does it feel? Yeah, it feels good. Just like, no. Yeah? So we're inviting... We are attuning to someone's somatic vocabulary and what it tells us. And that's important because you also need to be able to read them from a polyvagal perspective. Like, someone in dorsal, if they're becoming very overwhelmed by way of touching, you've got to be reading that that's happening. Yeah? They'll start to kind of slump. It might be subtle. It's not necessarily here, actually. It's like they might go from here to kind of like... You start to lose. Can you see what's happening with my eyes? There's a little bit of a deadening. And you'll feel them drift a bit. You'll just feel it. It's like they're not as much here with you and with themselves as they were five seconds ago. It's like... Okay, so it feels a bit much, huh? Oh, yeah, yeah. It's a lot, you know? Yeah, it's a lot. That's because I read it, not because they said it. Yes? And if something we're doing is getting them really sympathetic, that might be fine. Yeah? If you've got someone who's super collapsed, it might be really good that they get a little jumpy. And so you might get jumpy with them. Yeah? So if they're usually someone who's very... And they're like, yeah, I just... I don't know. She's really pissed off, you know? It's like, yeah, you just feel really pissed. Your mirror in, yes? Where you are is fine. I'm right there with you. Let's be jumpy. Yeah? Let's just get up a little bit. But also being mindful of, like, can they handle it? Are they holding it? Yeah? Or are they becoming panicky or distressed? If someone's upset, yeah? There may be moments where they start to... Yeah? It's like, that's okay, because if you take a breath, it will shut them down. So I, as a therapist, used to do that. And this is when we have basic training in body work, super basic. So a therapist will say, take a breath. It's like, no, no, don't tell someone to do that when they first start hyperventilating. Because what's happening is they're actually in their sympathetic pain, right? It's coming out. It's coming out. The panic's emerging. But it's always there. It's always there. It's just that now you're getting to see it. So there might be a few moments, even a minute, maybe a minute, where it's okay to let them be. Yeah? It's like, whew, they've gone super sympathetic, right? They're all up here. It's all high and tight. You stay relaxed. Let it happen. If it's sort of, you're now into maybe 30 seconds, 40 seconds, because that's quite a long time. Can you feel that? It doesn't sound very long, but actually to be sitting for 30 seconds, if we were to put on a timer right now, it's quite a long time. And you're not seeing it flux, which is... Yeah? Yeah? If you don't hear the long breath starting to come in every couple, then you might, like, I'm with you. I'm here. So you're offering relational co-regulation. Not, yeah? Or it's okay. Let it be. It's okay. Let it be. I've got you. And then usually what will happen is there might be a bit more. And then there'll be a wave. Yeah? It will unlock. The tension will unlock. And they'll flood, which is good. Because they're not actually flooding. When we use the word flooding, that's when something is coming up through your system in a way that it feels like you can't unlock it, like it's not coming over and out. It's just stuck and it makes you feel ill. Do you know that feeling? Have you guys ever had that feeling? It's like the tsunami rose to your throat and got wedged there and you're now drowning in yourself. That's flooding. But once the wave comes up and over, and they now sob, great. Let it be. Let it be. But if someone is clearly stuck, so they're in a sympathetic, they've become super jittery and they're just getting more and more manic, that won't happen that often, to be perfectly honest. Because if the bond you're forming is really strong, there's a lot of co-regulation going on, and it's unlikely that someone will go there and get really wiry. Because hopefully we're titrating and pendulating enough that we aren't really inviting them to dive in the deep end. You know, without, you know, I'll take it back. Okay, let's go back to you. So every time, this is the thing with intervention, with your commentary, when someone's sharing stuff and it's emotional and it's charged and it's deep and it's difficult and it's painful, you have to be able to feel when should I not say a word, not a word, because it would intrude, and where are the micro moments where just a, yeah, right, why? Because you're balancing the energy of the space. You aren't leaving them in themselves to get more and more charged. You take it just for a moment and you're calming your response, the steadiness of your responsive holding will help them stay on an even keel. Does that make sense? Yeah. So hopefully, you know, someone's not going to get activated. They may get very emotional, so I'll repeat, very emotional is not the same as highly dysregulated. Yeah? Yeah. Can I just ask? Yeah. You said if they're jittery, and I'm like popping a window, you would, at that stage, you would say, yeah, should we take a breath, or what did you say? No, I didn't. No. What did you say? I'm here. Yeah. Yeah, I'm here. But then you went on to say. Yeah, so I'm leaping, so forgive the large circle, this
 Is it big or small? What kind of tree is that? I don't know. And they'll find their way back to you. So bear in mind that eye contact will be very, very difficult and you shouldn't force it. And as you see them landing, you'll notice them starting to flick back to you. Just warmth but not too... It's like I'm here. Yeah? Soft eyes, warm smile. Not like... You know, you don't want them to meet a concerned look. You're totally at ease. You're warm, you're there and I'm totally here for you to come back to you when you're ready. That's what you're conveying energetically, somatically. And they'll find their way back to you. And it may stay quite difficult. One, just because they won't be filling out of sympathetic or maybe even dorsal. They may actually go quite ashamed and collapsed when they crash. So you just have to kind of let them be there and let them work their way out. And bear in mind that every time you're making eye contact with them on a level that is safe, soft and slow, you are actually helping them get back to the social engagement system. Back to ventral? Yeah? Every time we make eye contact, as long as it isn't so long it's activating, it's like you're welcoming them back to ventral label. Okay? And you have to be patient because you may just have to sit and really let this happen in their body. So you're just sitting and you're right with them. And if you feel that the quiet or the waiting is uncomfortable for them, then speak. Use your voice. Reassure them. Like, it's okay. We'll just take a minute, huh? Just wait a minute. Yeah? And someone will often actually, it's very common that someone will kind of close their eyes for a second or a vert and take a breath. So they'll come into themselves and... Okay. You get the gist. All right. So let's go to... Yeah? Please. I'm going to ask questions after all of that. And then you've got them back to a state of quiet. Then what would you do? Because obviously something big's come up. And then you've got them back to being in the room with you. Yeah. Function. Yeah. Because you don't want to ignore what's just happened. No. But you don't want to then put them back in. So what do you do then? What do you do? You let them lead. Right. Okay. And if they usually will of their own accord. So once grounded, it's usually, not always, but usually someone will then go like, wow, I just didn't... It really took me by surprise. I just didn't know that was there. Or I'd never really thought about that before. Yeah. I'm not really going anywhere with it other than acknowledging. Or you can go super cognitive on it and kind of just take a moment. But you have to be careful with this because it can end up feeling like you overtake the space in a way that it starts to become about you. But sometimes... And you're just not going to get it right all the time. I almost definitely don't. It's human work. But, you know, yeah, I mean, I think it's true for a lot of us, hey? Like, I think for so many of us, it's really hard to blah, blah, because our parents are... So you're now... Because what you're doing there, it's not about analyzing. It's about meaning-making. Yeah? Meaning-making. Reclaiming our story. Normalizing. Humanizing. I get really overwhelmed, you know? I often get overwhelmed when I make contact with this kind of stuff. It's really difficult. It's really difficult. But if you think, you can also ask, like, do you feel like there's anything about what's come up that you'd like us to speak around or you'd like to share or say? Do you feel like we should just let it be for now? They'll tell you. So do you notice how many times I'm saying that? Ask them. Ask. Like, I don't think my experience and, you know, the ones that I've had sort of anecdotally relate to me, therapists often don't ask. Ask. Ask what they need. Like, sure, we're going to get really skilled at reading cues, but we also aren't mind readers. Ask someone what their needs were. That's beautiful. That's powerful. Probably very few people have ever done it for them. Ask them. They'll tell you. And if they say they don't know, and what... Okay, so here's something. I don't know, really. Okay. Wait. Because usually if you give it some moments, they actually do know, and they will then pivot you. They'll go, you know, I don't know. Can you see what's happening, what I'm acting out, so that you can recognize it when you sit with someone else? I don't know, but what are they doing? They're thinking. They're feeling. So don't interrupt, yeah? I don't know. I don't really know. I mean, it is... Or like... Yeah, I don't know. I don't think I want to talk about it. Okay. Move on. Yeah? They'll tell you. Any other questions before we go? Just for comment, I think that accessing the somatics is amazing, and I remember a time when I had a lot of traps, and I acted out to you what I was doing in the middle of the night when I couldn't sleep, and you prompted me to like this. May I show for the sake of the camera what you were doing? Yeah. Right? So this. It was incredible because that unlocks a load of anger that I wasn't accessing. I've got difficulties with accessing anger anyway, but it sort of all started. It was just mind-blowing. Yeah. It really was. Just on that observation, that kind of led us down quite a deep track. It did. Yeah. Yeah, absolutely. Yeah. What about risk of making a reaction too strong? Like, obviously people kind of know reactions can be, and then they go around like, no, no, no, no to everything and everyone. Is that ever a risk, or was it just natural? So this is where your own journey really has to come in here and your own experience. What I mean by that is that what I know to be true because I've journeyed it and then consequently watched so many others journey the same, yeah? You begin to recognize a clear pattern, yes? Which is that my experience, particularly with boundaries, that we're talking about right now, and anger, and anger and boundaries. These are usually the things that people struggle with the most. Anger work will be some of the most potent transformational work that you do with people because this rage that rises, in fact, this is what we're going to do in a practice in a minute, right? So, no, so I'll talk about that then. But where I'm going is that people have to sometimes get really unreasonably angry for a while. And I've got to be honest, what I've learned is that it is not very helpful to try and mediate someone's rage whilst helping them access it. The mixed messaging just makes people nuts. It's really confusing. Like, well, you know, be angry, but don't be too angry. Also be mindful of how you're impacting it. Regardless of the truth, that we don't, you know, if I was working with someone for years and they're still stuck in just spewy, venomous rage, yes? I'm going to start working with it differently. But let's bear in mind that when someone's very, if rage is stuck in someone's system, it will display two ways. Either they'll never be angry outwardly, outwardly, to others, put it where it matters or where it actually needs to land, or they'll be really fucking angry all the time. Both are stuck, yeah? So don't be misled. Don't be fooled into thinking. And don't let a client who is angry let you believe that they're in contact with their anger because they're not. If they were, they wouldn't feel so agitated all the time. So my point is that we're really welcoming the pure rage. Does that make sense? Rather than the day-to-day irritations, it's like the real rage, yeah? That's what we're inviting forward. And someone will need to go through, sometimes a quite a long period of time, where they're just fucking angry, to put it bluntly. Like I had, I'll use myself as an example, so my rage and my no had been very, very shut down as a child in many, many ways. And then the early years of my healing were in an environment that was very spiritually bypassy. And it was all about, we will come, I just need to be clear, like there can be value in 12-step friendships. They probably changed their life, but I reckon we need to do a whole piece on it because you're going to get clients come to you who either consider going to them or are coming out of them. It will happen, and I really feel it's very important. I've been working with other therapists lately to kind of help educate and inform around the inner experience of 12-step friendships and why it's so deeply untrauma-informed and how damaging it can be in spite of the aspects that can be useful. It's very complicated, but it's very bypassy. And so the way that worked for me was that I learned in the early years of my healing, right, that basically that my anger was a defective character and that if I was angry, I needed to look at myself. Like not in the way that we do, but like why am I angry? Am I being like inconsiderate of the other person? Is there like an amends I need to make? Could I be less reactive? It's too bypassy. So once I had begun to pivot out of that paradigm and, you know, I say thank God just as a phrase
 I need to not give a fuck about what is happening for you because I've done only that my whole life. I'm trained to only care about what is there because I'm terrified if I don't that I will be abandoned. And so I really, it was a heavy time. And it was very important and I'm very blessed that I had teachers and mentors around me who knew how important it was. They didn't shut it. They didn't shame it. They didn't spiritually shame me. They didn't therapeutically shame me. They were just like, yeah, you're angry. You don't want him to do that. They just affirmed. And you know what? It kind of, it ran its own course. That might take a few months. It took me a couple of years. And you know, it also goes in waves and layers. So we might have a super ragey phase where we're, to be honest, maybe quite unreasonable. And you know what? Maybe you need to be. And I'll say that to people. Well, you know what? Maybe because a lot of us with trauma, adult children with trauma, I became so, part of my trauma is how good I am at mediating myself, at managing myself. You see how quickly the healing and the regulation becomes part of that. So actually at some point, and that's why there's a lot of nuance in this journey that you're taking people on. Yes, we're learning to self-regulate, but there will sometimes come a time and some of you may have heard this say, oh, because they fucked the regulation. Because they actually already know how to regulate. And what I can see is that they're now regulating to continue to self-manage and self-mediate in a way that is a perpetuation of the trauma itself. They're nice. They're good. They're using all their therapy skills to still be quiet, to still be good, to always tend to themselves. There's excessive responsibility taking off them with people with trauma. Too much. It's complex because sometimes we've been like projecting too much out there and not tuning to what was really going on at the same time as burdening ourselves with excessive guilt and responsibility. And so we kind of have to flip the two things out. So now we're really attuned to what's happening for us and placing our anger or our responsibility where it needs to land. Does that make sense? I'm now not being angry with myself. I'm placing the anger where it needs to land, but I'm actually being more accountable in a real world and authentic fashion. Does that make sense? It's kind of a complicated thing I feel to put into words. And you have to invite people to be unreasonable. It's like, well, so what? You know, that's okay if you lost your shirt. I lose my shirt. You know? That's all right. Humanizing. Yeah? Humanizing, humanizing, humanizing. Humanizing. That's okay. I went through a really angry phase too. Oh, so angry. It was so good. I think it was one of the most powerful times in my life. It ran its own course. And then I got to a point where I kind of wanted to invite a little more equilibrium again. But it changed me. And I've got to be honest, I've never seen it not change someone. So I've learned to trust it. And I've learned to welcome it and invite it. And I'll be honest, Claire, I've never seen someone really, when it comes through in a way that's real, I've never seen someone get stuck in it if they stay with the work. You know? I just haven't. And that's because what we resist persists. So our fear is always that if we enter the grief, we'll drown in it. If we unlock the rage, we'll get lost there. We'll get stuck there. And we'll just become some nasty, arsey person who's really fucking angry. But the paradox is that the opposite happens. The more we allow the rage, the more it disperses over time. And then a healthy balance sort of emerges where someone can like, when they need to, or in a moment of being very overwhelmed or triggered, and feel not so much shame around it. Like, that's okay. And then they also know, you know, they're like, you know, I can let that one go. They've got something going on. The equilibrium appears. It appears. Questions? Comments? Thank you for explaining that question. Obviously with the emotions being energy and emotion, I was just fascinated in, as you said, if we stay with the process and continue them through that, whether it be two years or three, then we can use that appropriately going forward. So that's okay. And our trust in their process is what allows them to have faith and trust in their process and relax into what is happening, even over very long periods of time. If I start to give signals of like, you've been a little bit angry for a while now. Maybe we should start look to that. Looking into that, it's like, I just think they've gone so far, so far, so far, and then like, all the way back in. Oh, it was bad. It was wrong. I went too far. So I just find that people need a lot of affirmation, a lot of normalizing, and a lot of humanizing. And an awful lot of, you know what, I've decided that we'll come back to these person-centered principles of like empathy, congruence, unconditional positive regard, that that is what we're talking about here, like unconditional positive regard. That doesn't mean justifying really poor behavior. Because the thing about healthy rage is that the paradox of it actually is it might burn through a lot in their life. It might start to, they might start to call out all kinds of people in their field. So there might be a lot of fire, a lot of threads getting burned, all kinds of things going on, more conflict in their relationship. More. Yeah? More. That doesn't mean it's getting worse. Now it's just that everything that was always there, that was unspoken, is being said. It's getting gritty now. So you can't be scared of the grit. Yeah? You can't be scared of the grit. You've got to be ready to walk right alongside them and be like, yeah, it gets kind of messy, hey? The intimacy is being fostered. That's the funny thing. You can't look at everything through one lens. More conflict actually might be more intimacy because now something real is happening. Yeah? Now everyone's not just living the lie. The facts are always friendly to quote a very dear old friend of mine. Now we're seeing what's really going on and it might not be fun and it might not be easy and it might be really scary. But now we're in the truth. The cops are turning. Everything's absolutely fine. You're helping people peel the lid off themselves and peel the lid off their lives. This is the hero's journey arc. It's going to get messy and it's fine. You trust that. They'll trust it right alongside you. So it's going to get messy. Conflict. Where was I going with that? I can't remember. I guess it will come back. Oh, unconditional positive regard. So they won't actually be inherently destructive in a damaging or unhealthy way. So again, forgive me for the repetitions but nuance. So anger does burn. When it's anger that's like it's been so locked, every now and again it goes like it will hurt people in a way that is not productive. Yeah? Or boom. Implosion. Depression. Collapse. But when the anger starts to come through in this very raw way, very pure way, we could see it as sacred rage. It will have a destructive quality but not all destruction is inherently bad or unhealthy. Death and birth. Death and birth. Yes? Possibly. But that's slightly different. It can be rupture of care. But I'm more talking about sometimes you have to burn things to the ground for something new to be born. And just because someone has shut their mother out for the first time in their whole life and we'll come more back to those kinds of things later. Or is now arguing with their partner more than ever before. It doesn't mean people will often feel like now I'm just wounding others. And actually often it's just that the other is being confronted with the raw emotional truth. Does that make sense? And that is not inherently bad. It's not inherently bad. If I, I'll try and make it literal. If I show you how incredibly angry I am with you because I'm deeply hurt and frustrated. Initially for the other that may feel like they don't like it. They don't want to handle it. But that's not always bad, is it? It's like you're being confronted also with your own behavior. Yeah? So even though initially, okay so I'll use my mum as an example. The times I've been angry at my mum, you know, it does wind her. She can't handle it. But the thing is that I've had to have occasions where I was allowed to be angry at my own mother. Right? Like she's the person that should be most safe to be angry with. And so on the one hand I needed that. And on the other even though she can't handle it, in that moment whether or not she takes her, whether or not she takes her, you know, there is an opportunity being offered to that other. There is an opportunity that has been offered to her to forge the connection she says she so deeply wants. Right? There is the opportunity for more intimacy. There is the opportunity for her to get real, you know, and tend to what is very, very painful that is living inside her. I'm pulling it all on the table and saying like, you know, I'm doing this. Do you want to do this? I'm inviting someone. That is actually an inherently loving action. Now if I were to repetitively try to get her to do it over years and decades, that's different. And that is then something that is stuck in me that is, there's
 like there will be like a thunderstorm of insight. Yeah? There will be lightning going off in their world. Yes? No. Like they will sweep through with their tears and with their rage, with their thunderstorm, and it clears. It completely, they will burn things to the ground. This is the destructive principle of the feminine, and it's because she knows how to destroy and then rebirth. So those who align with the feminine will feel a lot of shame about their innate ability to feel deeply and how expressive, I've seen hand, yeah, they can be. Oh, right, yeah. And I feel that we need to do a lot of work in inviting that power and beginning to break the shame that women and those aligned with the feminine carry about their emotionality and begin to support people from a regulated place as to how you can channel it. And that regulated doesn't mean muted. I can be, I'm being vicarious, so just watch your own nervous system if it's triggering for you. I can be fucking furious with you. I'm totally regulated. Yeah? I'm not, yeah, I am right in command and there is energy moving through me. Yeah? I will bring my fire and I will bring my thunderbolt. And if you shame me for it, I will tell you no. Right? No, I have not. Like, no. Like, look at you. Yeah? You'll hear this a lot from people and partners and things. Like, you're all over the place. You're shamed because they're losing their shit. Yeah? Like, mad woman kind of story, narrative. And it's like, no, no. I am angry and I am hurt and I am frustrated because I cannot do this anymore. And it's fine, you know? And if you are uncomfortable with it, I understand that. But there is absolutely nothing wrong with how I feel, how I'm being, or how I'm expressing it right now. I am not even, like, I am not screaming at you. I am angry. And this is how my angry feels and my angry looks. I'm not going to be angry. Yeah? It's okay. So we're supporting people to know that it's like, it's okay and there are ways to express and hold that are incredibly powerful and deeply unwelcome within this patriarchal structure, deeply unwelcome by the masculine that is really, really frightened of them. And that doesn't mean that we're aggressing those in the masculine or shaming. They're frightened for a reason. They've been allowed access to none of their feminine principle. I think that women are allowed access to more of their masculine principle these days than men are allowed access to their feminine principle. So let's have compassion for the other side. Let's have compassion for the masculine person in that situation who will be fucking terrified. Terrified. It's terrifying for them. So let's also be mindful of that without managing it in a codependent way. It's really scary. If you have lived in like a little metal bubble all of your life and suddenly there is a thunderstorm, you will be terrified of it. So, you know. Yeah. Okay. Questions, comments? Yeah, thank you. What I get afraid of, I think that was what I shared yesterday when we were doing work together, is that I remember I told you over the time when we were in Thailand, we did some breath work and we did a lot of breath work and something happened to Cam, like something was opened up and then he went into a very, very deep depression for three days and then he explained to me that he didn't know what was going on but suddenly he felt very suicidal. So that's all, that's it then. I'm very afraid of opening somebody up or bringing things up and kind of just leaving them. And I know you said that, of course, if you're carrying out the work, at that moment he wasn't capable, he couldn't get out of bed. He was in a really, really bad way. And I feel like there could have been a possibility that if I wasn't there with him to hold him, I don't know what he would have done. And he couldn't explain. All he said to me was, after day three, he goes, I think it's something to do with the breath work that we did. Yeah, for sure it was. Yeah, 100% it was. And then that was so scary. And then, you know, I suppose the only thing that I can think is that I grounded him. Yeah, you did. And after I grounded him and we did that together, he goes, oh, well, that feels better. A couple of days later, you could see he's coming out of it. He wants some food. But it's something, I would be afraid that I could potentially help somebody, a client, bring these emotions up after seeing it with him. And then what if they do something to himself? You know, what if they can't handle it? And they're not capable of going to somebody and asking for help. That's what I'm afraid of. So let me catch me. Absolutely, I understand that. Or we can talk and look about like suicide, like suicidal ideation, fear of taking people to places that you can't bring them back from. We'll look at that later. OK, but in general terms, we aren't opening people up. We're not doing breath work. Yes, and in general, we're supporting people to open themselves. And we are constantly reading where the threshold of safety is. And if we're feeling that the threshold of safety is beginning to get crossed, what are we doing? We're bringing them right back. But we're pendulating. We're trying to create little bits, little bits, little bits. There is a reason that you will not be taught that kind of breath work on this training. I can teach that kind of breath work. Don't do it. I don't do it. There's a lot of it out there. And I'm not saying that it can never be powerful and that people can't have good experiences of it. But I think it's risky because you're just taking someone so deep into their tissues and their trauma so rapidly. Why would we do that in half an hour? I think you have to have incredible, like a really high level of practice behind you. I think you have to have done a lot of work already. You have to be very safe with the person who's holding it, probably know them, right? Or at least they're very well referred, probably in very small groups. It's really advanced work. It's really, really advanced work. What is it? So obviously I use breath and you'll see moments, but you're talking minutes when I'll say we're going to do some. So here it is. You'll see me give you minutes where I ask you to breathe deeply into your tissues. And so I'm inviting you to call up that much. But also you'll also hear me say in sessions, like if you start to feel overwhelmed, panicked, highly agitated, it feels like too much. Like drop back. Yes. Beginner's breath work. Yeah, but I don't even like really saying beginners because that implies that it's like, oh, I want to do advanced. I think that it's more advanced. I think it's more mature. I think it's more skillful to do less, to go slowly. I think that there is an immaturity in pushing too hard and fast for the big release, for the quick fix. It's not safe. So we don't do it, okay? I will teach you how to do breath work, but I'm going to show you later in the course how to do breath work in a really, in a way that is progressive, that is gentle. And here's the irony, it's therefore more effective. People want the firework because it satisfies a really deep part of them that is so desperate for healing in a quick fix culture that they think, if I go to a breath work class and I have this huge fucking catharsis, I start having flashbacks of my sexual abuse as a child and I start sobbing and trembling, then it's like, something happened. Something came out. It satisfies this scared part that feels it will never be fixed. And sometimes there is release in it, but often it's re-traumatizing and there's no one to help keep carrying it. It's like, okay, so all that just happened. Now we've got to like, yeah? There's no one to keep carrying it. And so people get left really jangled, really shaky, and usually will end up in some form of collapse or dissociation where they have to go into some kind of spiritual bypass, dissociative bypass, right? To believe that what happened was useful and okay, and then they'll keep doing it. They keep doing it because if I do more, if I do more, I do more. People get into a really big mess with it. I've had to do a lot of stabilizing with a lot of people who maybe they got super into heavy breath work and the same can happen with medicines, with plant medicines. They get super into plant medicines because it's like they either need to go here, and it's like it can almost be self-harming. You know, I'm not saying it's never useful. It can be really powerful in the right time, in the right space, in the right way, you know, with the right person. They get really addicted to like some plant medicines could cause purging. They get really addicted. They feel like they keep trying to get everything out. They keep trying to get it out. And I've got to be honest, I find it quite upsetting. If I could just make it clear, like the breath work that we did, on reflection, I can see that I had a big part to play with fixing because we met somebody who was a breath work practitioner in Thailand. I'm very sorry. I'll rarely do this. But can I ask, like, why? Because I just wanted to explain that it's not just normal breath work, like what we're doing, right? So it's like it was really
